---
package:
  name: "akkapros"
  version: "3.2.0"
pipeline: "pipeline"
step: "atfparse"
file:
  id: "fa680427-263b-5faf-a14e-e4ba5bdf3713"
  title: "L I.2 Poem of Creation (*Enūma eliš*) SB II | L I.2 Poem of Creation (*Enūma eliš*) SB IV | L I.2 Poem of Creation (*Enūma eliš*) SB VI | L I.2 Poem of Creation (*Enūma eliš*) SB VII | L I.5 Erra and Išum SB I | L III.3 Marduk’s Address to the Demons SB -"
  format: "trans"
  version: "1.0.0"
  date: "2026-08-12"
metadata:
  input_file_id: null
  options:
    append: true
  data:
---

Tiamat assembled her creatures,
Drew up for battle against the gods her brood.
Thereafter Tiamat, more than Apsu, was become an evildoer.
She informed Ea that she was ready for battle.
When Ea heard this,
He fell silent in his chamber and sat stock still.
After he had taken thought and his anger had calmed,
He made straight his way to Anshar his grandfather.
He came in before his grandfather, Anshar,
All that Tiamat plotted he recounted to him,
“My father, Tiamat our mother has come to hate us,
“She has assembled a host, savage with rage.
“All the gods rallied around her,
“Even those you created are going over to her side,
“They massed around her, drew up at Tiamat’s side.
“Angry, scheming, never lying down to rest night nor day,
“Eager for battle, rumbling, raging,
“Forming a host, that they might start hostilities.
“Mother Hubur, who can form everything,
“Added countless invincible weapons, gave birth to monster serpents,
“Pointed of fang, with merciless incisors(?),
“She filled their bodies with venom for blood.
“Fierce dragons she clad with glories,
“Gave them glories, made them like gods, (saying)
‘Whoever sees them, shall collapse in terror!
‘Let their bodies keep leaping forward and never retreat!’
“She deployed serpents, dragons, and hairy hero-men,
“Lion monsters, lion men, scorpion men,
“Mighty demons, fish men, bull men,
“Bearing unsparing arms, fearless in battle.
“Her commands were absolute, no one opposed them,
“Eleven indeed on this wise she created.
“From among the gods her offspring, who made up her army,
“She raised up Qingu, it was he she made greatest among them.
“Leadership of the forces, command of the host,
“Arming, contact, ordering the attack,
“Supreme strategist in warfare,
“(All) she entrusted to him, stationed him at the command post.
‘I have cast a magic spell for you. I make you the greatest in the assembly of the gods,
‘Kingship of all the gods I put in your power.
‘You are the greatest, my husband, you are illustrious.
‘Your command shall always be greatest, over all the Anunna-gods.’
‘She gave him the tablet of destinies, had him hold it to his chest, (saying)
‘As for you, your command shall not be changed, your utterance shall endure.’
‘When Qingu was the highest, had taken supremacy,
‘He ordained destinies for the gods her children,
‘Whatever you (gods) command shall cause a blaze to die out,
‘Your concentrated venom shall make the mighty one yield.’”
When Anshar heard, the speech was very alarming,
He cried out “Woe!”; he bit his lip,
His feelings were outraged, his mind was uneasy,
His cries to Ea his offspring grew choked,
“My son, you yourself were instigator of battle!
“Do you bear the consequences of your own handiwork!
“You went forth and killed Apsu,
“So Tiamat, whom you have enraged, where is one who can face her?”
The sage counsellor, wise prince,
Producer of wisdom, divine Nudimmud,
Answered [his] father Anshar gently,
With soothing words, calming speech,
“My father, inscrutable, ordainer of destinies,
“Who has power to create and destroy,
“O Anshar, inscrutable, ordainer of destinies,
“Who has power to create and destroy,
“I will declare my thoughts to you, calm yourself for a moment,
“Recall in your heart that I made a good plan.
“Before I undertook to kill Apsu,
“Who had foreseen what is happening now?
“Ere I was the one who moved quickly to snuff out his life,
“I indeed, for it was I who destroyed him, [wh]at was occurring?”
When Anshar heard this, the speech pleased him,
He relaxed, saying to Ea,
“My son, your deeds are worthy of a god,
“Such a cruel, irresistible blow, you can [ward it off],
“Ea, your deeds are worthy of a god,
“Such a cruel, irresistible blow, you can [ward it off]!
“Go then to Tiamat, mollify her onslaught,
“May her anger be pacified, quickly banished by your magic spell.”
When he heard the command [of his father] A[nshar],
He set off, making straight his way,
Ea went to seek out Tiamat's intentions.
He stopped, speechless, then turned back.
He came before Anshar the sovereign,
He entreated him, saying,
“[My father], Tiamat has carried her actions beyond me,
“I verified her intent, but my magic spell cannot counter it.
“Her strength is enormous, she is utterly terrifying,
“She is reinforced with a host, none can go out against her.
“Her challenge does not lessen in loudness.
“I felt fear at her clamor, I turned back.
“My father, do not despair, send another to her,
“A woman's force may be very great, but it cannot match a man’s.
“Do you be the one to scatter her ranks, to thwart her intentions,
“Before she lays her hands on us.”
Anshar was shouting, in a passion,
To Anu his son he said these words,
“Cherished son, valiant warrior,
“Whose strength is enormous, whose onslaught is irresistible,
“Make haste, take a stand before Tiamat,
“Soothe her feelings, let her heart be eased.
“If she will not listen to what you say,
“Say something by way of entreaty to her, so that she be pacified.”
When he heard what his father Anshar said,
“He set off, [made str]aight his way,
Anu went to seek out Tiamat's intentions.
He stopped, speechless, then turned back.
He came before Anshar, his father who begot him,
He entreated him, s[aying],
“My father, Tiamat has carried her actions beyond me,
“I verified her intent, but my magic spell cannot counter it.
“Her strength is enormous, she is utterly terrifying,
“She is reinforced with a host, none can [go out against] her.
“Her challenge does not lessen in loudness,
“I felt fear at her clamor, I turned back.
“My father, do not despair, send another to her,
“A woman's strength may be very great, but it cannot match a man’s.
“Do you be the one to scatter her ranks, to thwart her intentions,
“Before she lays her hands on us.”
Anshar fell silent, gazing at the ground,
Nodding toward Ea, he shook his head.
The Igigi-gods and Anunna-gods were all assembled,
With lips closed tight, they sat in silence.
No god would go out [at his command],
None would go against Tiamat as [he] ordered.
So it was that Anshar, father of the great gods,
His heart full of anger, did not summon anyone!
The mighty firstborn, champion of his father,
Hastener to battle, the warrior Marduk
Did Ea summon to his secret place,
That he made the speech to him he had prepared in his mind,
“O Marduk, think carefully, heed your father,
“You are my son who can relieve his heart!
“Draw nigh, approach Anshar,
“Be ready to speak, wait, seeing you he will be calm.”
The Lord was delighted at his father's words,
He drew near and waited before Anshar.
When Anshar saw him, his heart was filled with joyful feelings,
He kissed his lips, he banished his gloom.
“My father, let not your lips be silent but speak,
“Let me go, let me accomplish your heart's desire.
“[O Anshar], let not your lips be silent but speak,
“Let me go, let me accomplish your heart's desire!
“What man is it who has sent forth his forces for battle against you?
“Why, Tiamat, a woman, comes out against you to arms!
“[My father], creator, rejoice and be glad,
“Soon you will trample the neck of Tiamat.
“[Anshar], creator, rejoice and be glad,
“Soon you will trample the neck of Tiamat!”
“[Go], son, knower of all there is to know,
“Bring Tiamat to rest with your sacral spell.
“Make straight, quickly, ride the storm chariot,
“At the sight of it, unstoppable, turn her back!”
The Lord was delighted at his grandfather's words,
His heart was overjoyed as he said to his grandfather,
“Lord of the gods, of the destiny of the great gods,
“If indeed I am to champion you,
“Subdue Tiamat and save your lives,
“Convene the assembly, nominate me for the ultimate destiny!
“Take your places in the Assembly Place of the Gods, all of you, in joyful mood.
“When I speak, let me ordain destinies instead of you.
“Let nothing that I shall bring about be altered,
“Nor what I command be revoked or changed.”
They set out for him a princely dais,
He took his place before his fathers to be made sovereign.
“You are the most important among the great gods,
“Your destiny is unrivalled, your command is sublime.
“O Marduk, you are the most important among the great gods,
“Your destiny is unrivalled, your command is sublime!
“Henceforth your command cannot be changed,
“To raise high, to bring low, this shall be your power.
“Your command shall be steadfast, your word shall not be gainsaid.
“Not one of the gods shall go beyond the limits you set.
“Support is wanted for the gods’ sanctuaries,
“Wherever their shrines are, your own shall be established.
“You are Marduk, our champion,
“We bestow upon you kingship of all and everything.
“Take your place in the assembly, your word shall be supreme.
“May your weapon never strike wide but dispatch your foes.
“O Lord, spare his life who trusts in you,
“But the god who has taken up evil, snuff out his life!”
They set up among them a certain constellation,
To Marduk their firstborn said they (these words),
“Your destiny, O Lord, shall be foremost of the gods’,
“Command destruction or creation, they shall take place.
“At your word the constellation shall be destroyed,
“Command again, the constellation shall be intact.”
He commanded and at his word the constellation was destroyed,
He commanded again and the constellation was created anew.
When the gods his fathers saw what he had commanded,
Joyfully they hailed, “Marduk is king!”
They bestowed upon him scepter, throne, and staff,
They gave him unopposable weaponry that vanquishes enemies, (saying),
“Go, cut off the life of Tiamat,
“Let the winds bear her blood away as glad tidings!”
The gods, his fathers, ordained the Lord’s destiny,
On the path to success and authority did they set him marching.
He made a bow, appointed it his weapon,
He mounted an arrow, set it on the string.
He took up a mace, held it in his right hand,
Bow and quiver he slung at his side.
Thunderbolts he set before his face,
With raging fire he covered his body.
Then he made a net to enclose Tiamat within it,
He deployed the four winds that none of her might escape:
South Wind, North Wind, East Wind, West Wind,
He fastened the net at his side, gift of his grandfather Anu;
He made ill wind, whirlwind, cyclone,
Four-ways wind, seven-ways wind, destructive wind, back-and-forth wind:
He released the winds that he had made, the seven of them,
Mounting in readiness behind him to roil inside Tiamat.
Then the Lord raised the Deluge, his great weapon.
He mounted the terrible chariot, the unopposable Storm Demon,
He hitched to it the four-steed team, he tied (the reins) at his side:
“Slaughterer,” “Merciless,” “Overwhelmer,” “Soaring.”
Their lips are curled back, their teeth bear venom,
They know not fatigue, they are trained to trample down.
He stationed at his right gruesome battle and strife,
At his left fray that overthrows all formations.
He was garbed in a ghastly armored garment,
On his head he was covered with terrifying glories.
The Lord made straight and pursued his way,
Toward raging Tiamat he set his face.
He was holding a magic spell ready upon his lips,
A plant, antidote to venom, he was grasping in his hand.
At that moment the gods were stirring, stirring about him,
The gods his fathers were stirring about him, the gods stirring about him.
The Lord drew near, to see the battle of Tiamat,
He was looking for the stratagem of Qingu her spouse.
As he looked, his advance turned to confusion,
His thinking was disconcerted and his actions panicky,
And as for the gods his allies, who went at his side,
When they saw the valiant vanguard, their sight failed them.
Tiamat cast her magic spell pointblank,
Falsehood, lies she held ready on her lips.
“… lord, the gods rise against you,
“They assembled [where] they are, (but) are they on your side?”
The Lord [raised] the Deluge, his great weapon,
To Tiamat, who acted conciliatory, sent he (this word),
“Why outwardly do you assume a friendly attitude,
“While your heart is plotting to open attack?
“The children cried out, they were oppressive to their parents,
“But you, their own mother, spurned all natural feeling.
“You named Qingu to be spouse for you,
“Though he had no right to be, you set him up for chief god.
“You attempted wicked deeds against Anshar, sovereign of the gods,
“And you have perpetrated your evil against the gods my fathers.
“Though your main force is drawn up, though these your weapons are in array,
“Come within range, let us meet in single combat, you and I!”
When Tiamat heard this,
She was beside herself, she turned into a maniac.
Tiamat shrieked loud, in a passion,
Her frame shook all over, down to the ground.
She was reciting an incantation, casting her spell,
While the gods of battle were whetting their blades.
Tiamat and Marduk, sage of the gods, drew close,
They locked in single combat, joining for the fray.
The Lord spread out his net, encircled her,
The ill wind he was holding behind him he released in her face.
Tiamat opened her mouth to swallow (him),
He thrust in the ill wind so she could not close her lips.
The raging winds bloated her belly,
Her insides were stopped up, she gaped her mouth wide.
He shot off an arrow, it ruptured her belly,
It cut to her innards, it pierced the heart.
He subdued her and snuffed out her life,
He flung down her carcass, he took a stand upon it.
After he had slain Tiamat, the vanguard.
Her forces scattered, her host dispersed.
As for the gods her allies, who had marched beside her,
In fear and trembling they turned tail,
They tried to find a way out to save their lives,
There was no escaping the mesh that encircled them.
He drew them in and smashed their weapons.
They were cast in the net and sat in a heap,
They were heaped up in the corners, full of woe,
They were bearing his punishment, held in confinement.
As for the eleven creatures, the ones adorned with glories,
The demonic horde(?), who went as flunkies at her side,
He put on leadropes, he trussed their arms.
He trampled them under, together with their belligerence.
As for Qingu, who was trying to be great among them,
He bound him and reckoned him among the doomed gods.
He took away from him the tablet of destinies, which he had no right to,
He sealed it with a seal and affixed it to his chest.
Having captured his enemies and triumphed,
Having shown the vaunted foe subservient(?),
Having brought about Anshar's victory over all his enemies,
Having attained what Nudimmud desired, young Marduk
Made firm his hold over the captured gods,
Then turned back to Tiamat whom he had rendered helpless.
The Lord trampled upon the frame of Tiamat,
With his merciless mace he crushed her skull.
He cut open the arteries of her blood,
He let the North Wind bear (it) away as glad tidings.
When his fathers saw, they rejoiced and were glad,
They brought him gifts and presents.
The Lord calmed down, he began inspecting her carcass,
That he might divide the brine and fashion artful things.
He split her in two, like a fish for drying,
Half of her he set up and made as a cover, heaven.
He stretched out the hide, assigned watchmen,
Them he ordered not to let her waters escape.
He crossed heaven, he inspected the firmament,
He made it a counterpart to Apsu, the dwelling of Nudimmud.
The Lord measured the construction of Apsu,
He founded the Great Sanctuary, the likeness of Esharra
(In) the Great Sanctuary, the Esharra he had built, (and in) heaven,
He made Ea, Enlil, and Anu dwell in their holy places.
When Marduk had heard the speech of the gods,
He was resolved to make artful things:
He would tell his idea to Ea,
What he thought of in his heart he proposes,
“I shall compact blood, I shall cause bones to be,
“I shall make stand a human being, let “Man” be its name.
“I shall create human beings,
“They shall bear the gods’ toil and they shall rest”
“I shall artfully double the ways of the gods:
“Let them be honored as one but divided in twain.”
Ea answered him, saying these words,
He seconded the plan to let the gods rest,
“Let one, their brother, be given to me,
“Let him perish that people may be fashioned.
“Let the great gods convene in assembly,
Let the guilty one be given up that they may abide.”
Marduk convened the great gods in assembly,
He spoke to them magnanimously as he gave the command,
The gods heeded his utterance,
As the king spoke to the Anunna-gods (these) words,
Let your first reply be the truth!
Do you speak with me truthful words!
“Who was it that started the war,
“Suborned Tiamat and drew up for battle?
“Let him be given over to me, the one who started the war,
“I shall make him bear his punishment, you shall dwell in peace.”
The Igigi, the great gods answered him,
To Lugaldimmeankia, counselor of the gods, their lord,
“It was Qingu who made war,
“Suborned Tiamat and drew up for battle.”
They bound and held him before Ea,
They imposed the punishment on him and shed his blood.
From his blood they (Marduk and Ea) made humankind,
He imposed the toil of the gods and the gods (from it).
After Ea the wise had made humankind,
And had imposed the toil of the gods on them —
That deed is beyond comprehension,
By the artifices of Marduk did Nudimmud create —
Marduk the king divided the gods,
All the Anunna-gods, all of them, into upper and lower,
He assigned to Anu for duty at his command.
Three hundred he posted in heaven for duty,
A like number he designated for the ways of the netherworld:
Six hundred he made dwell in heaven and netherworld.
After he had given all the commands,
And had divided the shares of the Anunna-gods of heaven and netherworld,
The Anunna-gods made ready to speak,
To Marduk their lord they said,
“Now, Lord, you who have freed us from toil,
“How may we requite you?
“We will make a shrine, whose name shall be a byword,
“Your chamber shall be our stopping place, we shall find rest therein.
“We shall set up a shrine shrine, we shall reinforce its emplacement,
“When we come (to visit you), we shall find rest therein.”
When Marduk heard this,
His features glowed brightly, like the day,
“Then build Babylon the task as that you requested,
“Let bricks be formed for it, build high the shrine.”
The Anunna-gods set to with hoes,
One (full) year they made its bricks.
When the second year came,
They raised the head of Esagila, the counterpart to Apsu,
They built the lofty ziggurat of Apsu,
For Anu, Enlil, Ea and him they founded the dwelling.
He took his seat in splendor before them,
Its pinnacles were facing toward the base of Esharra.
After they had done the work of Esagila,
All the Anunna-gods devised their own shrines.
The three hundred Igigi-gods of heaven and the six hundred of Apsu all convened.
The Lord, on the Exalted Dais, which they built as his dwelling,
Seated the gods his fathers for a banquet,
“This is Babylon, your place of dwelling.
Take your pleasure there, seat yourselves in its delights!”
The great gods sat down,
They set out cups, they sat down at the feast.
After they had taken their enjoyment inside it,
In awe-inspiring Esagila they held a ceremony,
All the orders and plans were made permanent,
All the gods divided the stations of heaven and netherworld,
The fifty of the great gods took their thrones,
The seven gods of destinies were confirmed forever for rendering judgment.
The Lord took the bow, his weapon, and laid it before them,
The gods his fathers looked upon the net he had made.
They saw how artfully the bow was fashioned,
His fathers were full of praises for his handiwork.
Anu raised (it), speaking to the assembly of the gods,
He kissed the bow, “This be my daughter!”
He named the bow, these are its names:
‘Longwood’ shall be the first, ‘May It Be on Target’ shall be the second.”
The third name, ‘Bow Star’, he made visible in heaven,
He fixed its position in the sky with respect to the gods his brethren.
After Anu had ordained the destinies of the bow,
He set up royal throne that stood highest among the gods,
Anu had him sit there, in the assembly of the gods.
Then the great gods convened,
They exalted Marduk's destiny, they prostrated themselves.
They laid upon themselves a curse (if they broke the oath),
With water and oil they swore, they touched their throats.
They granted him exercise of kingship over the gods,
They established him forever for lordship of heaven and netherworld.
Anshar gave him his illustrious name, Asalluhi,
“When his name is spoken, we will all do obeisance,
“At his command the gods shall pay heed.
“His word shall be supreme above and below,
“The son, our champion, shall be the highest.
“His lordship shall be supreme, he shall have no rival,
“He shall be the shepherd of the people of this land, his creatures.
“They shall tell of his ways, without forgetting, in the future.
“He shall establish for his fathers great food offerings,
“He shall provide for them, he shall take care of their sanctuaries.
“He shall cause incense burners for them to savored, that their chambers be joyful.
“He shall do the same on earth as what he brought to pass in heaven,
“He shall appoint the people of this land to serve him.
“Let the subject peoples be mindful that their gods should be invoked,
“At his command let them heed their goddess(es).
“Let their gods, their goddesses be brought food offerings,
“Let (these) not be forgotten, let them sustain their gods.
“Let their holy places be conspicuous, let their sanctuaries be well built.
“Though the people of this land be divided as to gods,
“For us, whatever name we pronounce, he shall be our god.
“Let us pronounce his fifty names,
“That his ways shall be (thereby) manifest, his deeds likewise(?):
“(1) MARDUK! Who, at his birth, was named by his forefather Anu,
“Establisher of pasture and watering place, who enriches (their) stables,
“Who by his Deluge weapon subdued the clangorous,
“Who rescued the gods his forefathers in distress.
“He is indeed the Son, the Sun, of the gods, radiant,
“They shall walk in his brilliant light forever.
“On the people he made, creatures with the breath of life,
“He imposed the gods' toil, that they be released.
“Creation, destruction, absolution, punishment:
“Each shall be at his command, they shall look to him.
“(2) MARUKKA shall he be, the god who created them (humankind),
“Who granted (thereby) the Anunna-gods contentment, who let the Igigi-gods rest.
“(3) MARUTUKKU shall be the trust of his land, city, and people,
“The people shall heed him hereafter.
“(4) MERSHAKUSHU, angry but deliberative, furious but relenting,
“Deep is his heart, all encompassing his feelings.
“(5) LUGALDIMMERANKIA is his name that we all pronounced,
“Whose commands we exalted above those of the gods his fathers.
“He shall be Lord of All the Gods of Heaven and Netherworld,
The king at whose disclosures the gods above and below stand in awe.
“(6) NARI-LUGALDIMMERANKIA is the name we invoked, mentor of all the gods,
“Who founded for us dwellings in heaven and netherworld in time of crisis,
“Who divided the positions of the Igigi- and Anunna-gods,
“At his name the gods shall tremble and quake in (their) dwellings.
“(7) ASALLUHI is that name of his which Anu, his father, pronounced,
“He shall be the light of the gods, the mighty defender,
“Who, according to his name, is guardian spirit of god and land,
“And who in mighty single combat saved our dwellings from harm.
“Asalluhi they named secondly (8) NAMTILA, god who maintains life,
“Who, in accordance with its meaning, repaired the shattered gods,
“The lord who revived the moribund gods by his sacral magic spell,
“Let us praise him as destroyer of the wayward foes!
Asalluhi, whose name was called thirdly (9) NAMRU,
“The pure god who purifies our ways.”
Anshar, Lahmu, and Lahamu pronounced these three of his names,
They said to the gods their sons,
“We have pronounced these three of his names,
“Do you, as we have, invoke his names.”
Joyfully the gods heeded their command,
They took counsel in the Assembly Place of the Gods,
“Of the valiant son, our champion,
“Our provider, we shall exalt his name!”
They sat down in their assembly to pronounce (his) destinies,
In each of their ceremonies they call his name:
“(10) ASARI, grantor of arable land, who established irrigated fields,
“Creator of grain and flax, who causes vegetation to spring up,
“(11) ASARALIM, who is honored in the house of counsel, whose counsel excels,
“The gods heed, they learn fear of him,
“(12) ASARALIMNUNNA, the honored one, light of the father who begot [him],
“Who implements the decrees of Anu, Enlil, Ea, (who is) Ninshiku,
“He is their provider who assigns their portions,
“Whose tiara increases abundance for the land.
“(13) TUTU is [he] who effected their restoration,
“He shall purify their shrines that they may be at rest,
“He shall devise the magic spell that the gods may be calm,
“Though they rise in anger, they shall turn [back].
“He shall be supreme, alone in the assembly of the gods,
“No one among the gods shall [make himself equal] to him.
“Tutu they called secondly (14) ZIUKKENNA, life of the masses,
“Who established the holy heavens for the gods,
“Who took control of their courses, assigned their stations,
“Let his deed not be forgotten among teeming humankind, let it be held fast,
“Tutu they called thirdly (15) ZIKU, who maintains purity,
“'God of the fair breeze, lord of obedience and consent,
“Producer of riches and wealth, who establishes abundance,
“Who turned all our want to plenty,
“Whose fair breeze we caught whiff of in our great crisis,
“Let them ever speak of his glorification, let them sing his praises!
“Tutu let teeming humankind magnify fourthly as (16) AGAKU,
“Lord of the sacral magic spell, reviver of the moribund,
“Who had mercy on the vanquished gods,
“Who removed the yoke imposed on the gods who were hostile to him,
“Who, to free them, created humankind,
“The merciful, whose power is to revive,
“Word of him shall endure, not to be forgotten,
“In the mouth of the people of this land, whom his hands have created.
“Tutu, fifthly, is (17) TUKU, his sacral magic spell shall ever be on their lips,
“Who with his sacral magic spell uprooted all the evil ones.
“(18) SHAZU, who knew the hearts of the gods, who could examine their innermost,
“Who allowed no evildoers to escape from him,
“Who upheld the gods’ host, who contented them,
“Who subdued the insubmissive, their (the gods’) broad [pro]tection,
“Who administers justice, uproots twisted testimony,
“In whose place falsehood and truth are distinguished.
“Shazu they shall praise secondly as (19) ZISI, who silenced those who rose (against him),
“Who banished paralyzing fear from the bodies of the gods his fathers,
“Shazu is, thirdly, (20) SUHRIM, who uprooted all enemies with the weapon,
“Who thwarted their plots, turned them into thin air,
“Who snuffed out all wicked ones, as many as came against him.
“The gods shall ever hail him in the assembly!
“Shazu is, fourthly, (21) SUHGURIM, who ensured obedience for the gods his fathers,
“Who uprooted the enemy, destroyed their offspring,
“Who dissipated their preparations, leaving not one of them intact.
“His name shall be invoked and spoken of in the land!
“Shazu later generations shall reflect on fifthly as (22) ZAHRIM,
“Who destroyed all adversaries, all the disobedient,
“Who brought all the gods who had fled back into their sanctuaries.
“This, his name, shall abide!
“To Shazu, moreover, they shall all render universal honor sixthly as (23) ZAHGURIM,
“He it is who destroyed all foes in battle.
“(24) ENBlLULU, lord who made them flourish, is he,
“Their mighty chosen one, who established offerings,
“Who establishes grazing and well-ordered watering places for the land,
“Who opened channels, apportioned abundant waters.
“Enbilulu they shall [invoke] secondly as (25) EPADUN, lord of open country and watercourses,
“Irrigator of heaven and earth, former of furrows, who formed the pristibe plow land in the steppe,
“Who regulates dike and ditch, who patterns the furrowed ground.
“Enbilulu they shall praise thirdly as (26) ENBILULU-GUGAL, irrigator of the watercourses of the gods,
“Lord of abundance, plenty, high yields,
“Producer of wealth, enricher of the inhabited world,
“Bestower of grain, who causes barley to appear.
“Enbilulu let them speak of fourthly as (27) HEGAL, who heaps up abundance for the peoples,
“Who rains prosperity over the wide earth, who makes vegetation flourish.
“(28) SIRSIR, who heaped up the mountain over Tiamat,
“Who ravaged the corpse of Tiamat with [his] weapon,
“Leader of the land, their faithful shepherd,
“To whom have been granted the cultivated field, the subsistence field, the furrow,
“Who crossed vast Tiamat back and forth in his wrath,
“Passing back and forth, as a bridge, at the place of single combat with her.
“Sirsir they named secondly (29) MALAH, so be it,
“Tiamat is his vessel and he the boatman.
“(30) GIL, who stores up grain in massive mounds,
“Who brings forth barley and flocks, grantor of the land’s seed.
“(31) GILIMMA, who established the bond of the gods, creator of enduring things,
“The bridle that curbed them, provider of good things,
“(32) AGILIMMA, the lofty one, remover of the diadem, who controls the snow,
“Creator of the earth above the waters, establisher of the heights of heaven.
“(33) ZULUM, who assigned fields for the gods, measured off his handiwork,
“Grantor of portions and food offerings, tender of sanctuaries.
“(34) MUMMU, creator of heaven and netherworld, who guides the lost,
“Divine purifier of heaven and netherworld, is, secondly, (35) ZULUMMU,
“To whom no other among the gods was equal in strength.
“(35) GISHNUMUNAB, creator of all peoples, who made the world regions,
“Who destroyed Tiamat’s gods, who made human beings from parts of them.
“(36) LUGALABDUBUR, the king who dissipated the preparations of Tiamat, neutralized [her] weapons,
“Whose support is firm in front and rear.
“(37) PAGALGUENNA, foremost of all lords, whose strength is outstanding,
“Who was greatest of the gods his brethren, lord of them all.
“(38) LUGALDURMAH, king of the bond of the gods, lord of the “Great Bond,”
“Who is greatest in the royal abode, most exalted by far among the gods.
“(39) ARANUNNA, counsellor of Ea, creator of the gods [his] fathers,
“Who, for his lordly ways no god whatever could equal.
“(40) DUMUDUKU, who renews for himself his pure dwelling in “Holy Hill,”
“Son of “Holy Hill,” without whom the lord of “Holy Hill” makes no decision.
“(41) LUGALSHUANNA, king whose strength is outstanding among the gods,
“Lord, strength of Anu, he who became supreme, chosen of Anshar.
“(42) IRUGGA, who ravaged all of them amidst Tiamat,
“Who gathered all wisdom to himself, universal in perception.
“(43) IRQINGU, ravager of Qingu, ... of battle,
“Who took charge of all commands, established lordship.
“(44) KINMA, commander of all the gods, grantor of counsel,
“At whose name the gods quake for fear like a whirlwind.
“(45) DINGIR-ESIZKUR shall dwell aloft in the house of prayer,
“The gods shall bring in their presents before him,
“Until he receives their due.
“No one but he can create artful things,
“The four peoples of this land are his creatures,
“No god but he knows how long they will live.
“(46) GIBIL, who tempered(?) the weapons,
“Who, in the battle with Tiamat, could create artful things,
“Universal in wisdom, ingenious in perception,
“Whose heart is so deep that all the gods together cannot comprehend it.
“(47) ADDU shall be his name, the whole sky he shall cover,
“His beneficent roar shall thunder over the earth,
“As he rumbles, he shall reduce the burden of the clouds, below, for the people, he shall grant sustenance.
“(48) ASHARU, who, according to his name, mustered the gods of destinies,
“He has taken all peoples in his charge.
“(49) NEBERU shall hold the crossing place of heaven and earth,
“They shall not cross above and below without awaiting him,
“Neberu is his star that he made visible in the skies.
“He shall stand at the turning point, they shall look upon him,
“Saying, ‘He who crossed back and forth, without resting, in the middle of Tiamat,
‘Neberu (“Crossing”) shall be his name, who holds the middle of it.’
“He shall fix the motions of the stars of heaven,
“He shall herd all the gods like sheep.
“He shall keep Tiamat subdued, he shall keep her life cut short,
“In the future of humankind, with the passing of time,
“He shall proceed unhindered, he shall persevere till distant days.
“Because he created the firmament and fashioned the surface of the earth,
“Father Enlil has named (him) his own name (50) ‘Lord of the World’.”
When Ea had heard all the names the Igigi-gods had named (him),
He was joyful of heart.
Saying, “He whose name his fathers have glorified,
“His name, like mine, shall be ‘Ea’.
“He shall be master of the sum total of my powers,
“He shall execute of all my commands.”
The great gods named his fifty names
“The Fifty,” they made his position supreme.
They must be grasped: the “first one” should reveal (them),
The wise and knowledgeable should ponder (them) together,
The master should repeat, and make the pupil understand.
The “shepherd,” the “herdsman” should pay attention,
He must not neglect the Enlil of the gods, Marduk,
So his land may prosper and he himself be safe.
His word is truth, his command unalterable,
Not one god can contradict what he says.
If he frowns, he will not relent,
If he is angry, no god can face his rage.
His heart is deep, his feelings all encompassing,
He before whom crime and sin must appear for judgment.
The revelation (of the names) that the “first one” discoursed before him (Marduk),
He wrote down and preserved for the future to hear,
The destiny of Marduk whom the Igigi-gods exalted,
Wherever water is the drink, his name let them invoke.
Let them sound abroad the song of Marduk,
How he defeated Tiamat and took kingship.
[… An]u, Enlil and Ea, Belet-ili […]
[… i]n? Babylon [and] Esagila […].
King of all settlements, creator of the universe, […]!
Hendursanga, first-born son of Enlil, [...],
Bearer of the august scepter, shepherd of the black-headed people, herdsman of [@i{mankind}]!
Išum, zealous butcher whose hands are suited to bear his fierce weapons,
And at the lightning of whose wrathful spears even Erra, the warrior of the gods, trembles in (his) abode!
His heart yearned for combat;
To his weapons he exhorted, “Smear yourselves with deadly venom!”
To the Seven, peerless warriors, “Gird your arms!”
And he said to you, (Išum): “I shall head for the (battle) field!”
You alone are the torch, it is your light they look to!
You alone are the champion, the gods [@i{march behind}!]
You alone are the sword, the butcher […]!
Should Erra arise, when he destroys the country,
Your mind will not rejoice, your heart will not be joyous.
Erra, like a sleepless man, his limbs are weary,
To his heart he said: “Shall I arise? Or shall I sleep on?”
To his weapons he exhorted, “Keep leaning on the corners!”
To the Seven, peerless warriors, “Return to your abode!”.
Until you should wake him, he is asleep in his bed,
Together with Mami, his wife, he revels.
O Engidudu, lord who wanders in the night, who guides the princes,
Who leads safely lad and girl, illuminating (them) like the light of day!
The divinity of the Seven, peerless warriors, is quite another:
Their origin is strange; they are charged with terror;
Whoever looks at them is paralyzed with fear: their breath is death,
People are terrified and dare not approach it.
Išum is a door: before them it is barred.
Anu, the king of the gods, impregnated Earth,
It bore him seven gods, whom he named “the Seven”.
These stood before him as he assigned them their functions.
He summoned the first and gave him orders:
“Wherever you go in your rage — you shall have no rival!”
He said to the second: “Burn like fire and blaze like a flame!”
He exhorted the third: “Let your face be that of a lion so that whoever beholds you melts down!”
He said to the fourth: “May the mountain be destroyed at the attack of your fiery weapons!”
And then to the fifth he said: “Blow like the wind and overwhelm the world!”
To the sixth he commanded: “sweep over above and below, sparing no one!”
The seventh he filled with viper’s venom: “Finish (all) life!”.
Once Anu had fixed the lot of all Seven,
He handed them over to Erra, the warrior of the gods, (saying): “Let them march at your flank!
“When the noise of the peoples in settlements becomes unbearable to you,
“And your temper drives you to decimate them,
“To ravage the black-headed and the wild beasts to destroy,
“Let these be your wrathful weapons, that they march at your flank!”.
They are furious, their weapons are raised,
They turn to Erra: “Rise! Stand up!
“Why, like a worn-out old man, do you reside in a city,
“Like a little child do you reside in a house?
“As one who knows not the (battle) field, will we eat the bread of women?
“As if we did not know how to fight, should we tremble and fear?
“Going to the (battle) field is becoming for manhood, like a festival!
“The city dweller, be he a prince, bread does not satiate him,
“Criticized by his own people, despised,
“He will have to beg to the humblest soldier.
“The city dweller, however mighty his strength,
“In what does it advantage the humblest soldier?
“The abundant bread of the city cannot compare with the cake baked in embers!
“The fine, honeyed beer cannot compare with the water from a waterskin!
“The palace on the citadel cannot compare with the shepherd’s hut!
“Warrior Erra, go out into the (battle) field, rattle your weapons!
“Make your noise loud, so that those above and below tremble!
“Let the Igigi hear it and extol your name!
“Let the Anunnaki hear it and fear the mention of you!
“Let the gods hear it and bend for your yoke!
“Let the kings hear it and kneel before you!
“Let the countries hear it and bring you their tribute!
“Let the demons hear it and die for themselves!
“Let the mighty one hear it and diminish his strength!
“Let the tall mountains hear it and @i{be destroyed}, and their summits be leveled!
“Let the rolling seas hear it and be troubled, and destroy (their) fauna!
“From the thickest forests let its trunks be uprooted!
“In the impenetrable reed-bed, let its reeds be snapped!
“May the peoples fear and their noise be quieted!
“Let the wild beasts shake and be brought to dust!
“May your fathers the gods regard and praise your heroism!
“Warrior Erra, why have you forsaken the (battle) field and reside in the city?
“The wild cattle and the wild beasts have despised us.
“Erra warrior, to you we address ourselves: Let our speech be unberable to you!
“Before the whole country belittles us,
“You must surely hear our advice!
“Do a kindness to the Anunnaki, who love silence:
“The Anunnaki, because of the noise of the people, are unable to fall asleep.
“The pastures – the source of life of the country – are trodden by cattle.
“The farmer, over @i{his land}, weeps bitterly.
“The lion and the wolf destroy the wild cattle.
“The shepherd, for his herd sleepless night and day, beseeches you,
“And we, who (once) knew the mountain passes, have forgotten every way.
“On our war-gear are spun cobwebs;
“Our precious bow offers resistance and has become too stiff for our strength,
“The tip of our sharp arrow is dulled,
“Our sword, for lack of bloodshed, is covered with rust.”
Warrior Erra heard them,
The words of the Seven pleased him like the finest of oils.
He prepared to speak, addressing Išum:
“Why, having heard this, are you sitting silent?
“Open the path, I shall take to the road!
“Let the Seven, the peerless warriors, make war!
“Make my fierce weapons march to my flank!
“And you, my champion, come before me!”.
[When] Išum [heard] these words,
Moved with compassion he said, [“alas!”]
“Warrior Erra, why have you devised insidious plots against the gods?
“You have plotted to ravage the earth and destroy [its inhabitants]; will you not desist?”
Erra prepared to speak,
Addressing Išum, his champion, in these words:
“Išum, pay attention, listen to my words!
“Concerning the peoples in settlements, whose pardon you requested,
“O champion of the gods, wise Išum, whose counsel is sweet!
“In heaven I am a wild bull, on earth I am a lion,
“In the land I am a king, among the gods a fury,
“Among the Igigi I am a hero, among the Anunnaki a champion,
“Among the beasts I am a bowhunter, in the mountain the pit-trap,
“In the reedbed I am the fire, in the forest the axe,
“In campaign I am the standard,
“As the wind I blow, as Adad I thunder;
“Like the sun god I oversee the whole orb.
“When I go forth into the field I am a wild goat;
“When I enter the steppe, as Nergal do I take residence.
“The gods all fear my name.
“And yet, the black-headed people despise me.
“I — for they have not feared my name
“And have neglected the orders of prince Marduk, I shall do as he pleases.
“I shall make prince Marduk angry, I shall raise him from his throne and devastate mankind.”
The warrior Erra set off to Šuʾanna, the city of the king of the gods,
He entered the Esagil, the palace of heaven and earth, and presented himself before him.
He prepared to speak, addressing the king of the gods:
“The image, the ornament of your lordship, which, like the stars of heaven, was full of splendor, why is it covered with filth?
“The diadem of your lordship, which used to make the Eḫalanki shine like the Etemenanki, why is it dimmed?
The king of the gods prepared to speak,
To Erra, the warrior of the gods, he addressed (his) word:
“Warrior Erra! Regarding that action you suggested:
“Once, in my anger, I arose from my throne, causing a flood;
“I arose from my residence, and the seams of heaven and earth were rent asunder.
“The heavens that were shaken: (for this cause,) the celestial bodies changed their positions, and I did not restore them to their places;
“The netherworld that trembled: (for this cause,) the (production) of the furrow decreased to such an extent that it was forever difficult to levy (taxes on it);
“The seams of heaven and earth that were rent asunder: the springs diminished and the floods receded. When I looked again, it was scarcely enough.
“The progeny of the living beings was scarce, but I did not restore things;
“Till, like a farmer, I took their seedlings in my hand.
“I built a(nother) house and settled therein.
“My image, which by reason of the deluge was removed, whose appearance was tarnished;
“I ordered the fire god to polish my face and cleanse my garments.
“When he had polished my image and fulfilled the action,
“And I had girded on the diadem of my lordship and returned to my place,
“My countenance was haughty, terrifying was my glance!
“The people that escaped the flood saw the action fulfilled:
“If I should now lift up my weapons, I would destroy the rest.
“Those craftsmen I brought down to the Apsû, and I have not yet decreed their return,
“I changed the location of the @i{mēsu}-tree (and its) amber, and revealed it to none.
“Now about that action you mentioned, O hero Erra!
“Where is the @i{mēsu}-tree, the flesh of the gods, fitting for the king of the universe?
“The pure tree, the splendid lad, which is meet for lordship;
“That in the waters of the vast sea spreads its roots a hundred double-hours to reach the depths of the Netherworld;
“Whose top in the heights touches the sky of Anu?
“Where is the pure blue pigment that was made (as) splendid (as) lapis lazuli?
“Where is Ninildu, master carpenter of my sovereignty?
“Bearer of the pure golden axe, skilled in the (carving of) that tree (@i{scil.} the @i{mēsu}-tree),
“Who makes (it) shine like the noonday and places (it) at my feet?
“Where is Kusibanda, the creator (of the images) of god and men, whose hands are choice?
“Where is Ninagal, the bearer of the upper and lower millstones,
“Who @i{molds} strong copper as (easily as) leather, the inventor of in[struments]?
“Where the choice pearls, the fruit of the vast sea, fitting for a diadem?
“Where the seven sages of the Apsû, pure carps, who like Ea their lord are perfect in their august wisdom, the purifiers of my body?
Warrior Erra heard him.
He prepared to speak, addressing prince Marduk:
“[…] … from the Apsû […] … to the heights.
“[The @i{mēsu}-tree, @i{which} …], I will cause its equal to ascend [...] the @i{mēsu}-tree,
“The pure amber, @i{which} […], I will cause its equal to ascend … […] … the amber.”
Marduk, hearing this,
Addressing warrior Erra, said to him:
“If I should rise up [from] my residence, the seams of heaven and earth would be torn asunder;
“The waters would rise and sweep away the land;
“They would turn a bright day into darkness;
“A storm would arise and [@i{cover}] the stars of the sky;
“An evil [wind] would arise and [@i{obscure}] the sight of the people, all living beings,
“The @i{gallû}-demons would ascend and seize [@i{mankind}];
“The unarmed man who confronts them […]
“The Anunnaki would ascend to the earth and ravage the living beings.
“[Until] I gird myself with my weapons, who will send them back?”
Erra, hearing this,
He prepared to speak, addressing prince Marduk:
“Prince Marduk, until you enter that house and the fire god purifies your garment and so return to your temple,
“Till that time I will assume command and strengthen the seams of heaven and earth.
“I will ascend to the sky to give orders to the Igigi,
“I will go down to the Apsû to inspect the Anunnaki.
“The fierce @i{gallû}-demons I will drive off to the Netherworld,
“I will oppose them my wrathful weapons.
“Of the evil wind – like a bird, I will bind its wings.
“When you enter that house, O prince Marduk,
“On the right and on the left of your door I will station Anu and Enlil like bulls.”
Prince Marduk heard it:
The words spoken by Erra pleased him.
Begone Evil, evil angel, evil demon, evil poultergeist, evil ghost,
evil devil, evil god, evil spirit, Lamaštu,
Labāṣu, Grabber
Lilû, Līlītu, young lady of Lilû,
Lugal-urra, offspring of Šulpa’e’a,
that which falls from heaven, the flash of a star, the fall of Bennu,
be you an image of Namtar, be you an image of the devil, be you any Evil that exists,
before the spell of Asalluḫi, the magician of the gods, son of Ea, the sage,
begone, depart, Evil that is in front of me, make off enemy that is behind me!
I am Asalluḫi, magician of the gods, the holy god,
I am Asalluḫi, the holy god, the life giving exorcist,
I am Asalluḫi, sage of the Apsû, whose spell is life,
I am Asalluḫi, lord of the abyss, magician of the gods, who makes the dead alive,
I am Asalluḫi, exorcist of life, who purifies heaven and earth.
I am Asalluḫi, the fierce storm, who drives away the great devils,
I am Asalluḫi, lord of the incantation, before whom the devils and Namtar-demons go into hiding.
I am Asalluḫi, who uproots illness, who destroys the high mountains,
I am Asalluḫi, warrior of the gods, who destroys the evil ones,
I am Asalluḫi, chief of the world regions, guardian of life,
I am Asalluḫi, who makes the dead alive, unique one of heaven and earth,
I am Asalluḫi, who is wide in knowledge, superlative in intelligence,
I am Asalluḫi, by whose rites the dead become alive,
I am Asalluḫi, who is strong in conflict and battle, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, who is girt with fierce awe, superlative in splendour,
I am Asalluḫi, who was created in E’unir, is full of terror,
I am Asalluḫi, shining, wise, the noble sage of the gods,
I am Asalluḫi, who surveys the height of the distant heaven,
I am Asalluḫi, I know the depth of the vast Ḫubur-river,
I am Asalluḫi, whom Sirsir names in the upper sea,
I am Asalluḫi, whom Laguda exalts in the lower sea.
I am Asalluḫi, discoverer of the sum of everything, son of Mami,
I am Asalluḫi, warrior who throws down, he who has evil at his disposal.
I am Asalluḫi, aristocrat of the gods of the distant heavens,
I am Asalluḫi, giver of prosperity and life to the teeming peoples,
I am Asalluḫi, who saves the defeated, takes the hand of the fallen,
I am Asalluḫi, who drives away the enemy, fells the evil one,
I am Asalluḫi, who defeats the demon, the evil devil,
I am Asalluḫi, lord of Babylon, merciful am I,
I am Asalluḫi, prince who controls every law,
I am Asalluḫi, who knows everything, offspring of Ninšiku,
I am Asalluḫi, mighty prince, who is superlative in intelligence,
I am Asalluḫi, whose splendour covers all the world regions.
I am Asalluḫi, who rises up in fury, a fearsome flood,
I am Asalluḫi, at the mention of whose name devils and Namtar-demons go into hiding.
I am Asalluḫi, who does not speak in the place of blasphemy, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, who is victorious, Marduk, in conflict and battle,
I am Asalluḫi, who was created by his own decree, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, diviner of the world regions, the fearsome, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, the holy god, who sits in radiance, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, who is blessed in Eugga, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, unique one of heaven and earth, the abyss and the sea,
I am Asalluḫi, who lives in Esagil, who gives a protecting angel,
I am Asalluḫi, who loves truth everywhere (“above and below”),
I am Asalluḫi, who dispels darkness, who extends the years,
I am Asalluḫi, who establishes/ed all the Igigi of heaven, the great gods.
I am Asalluḫi, who lives in Esagil, who cleanses their abodes,
I am Asalluḫi, who lives in Esagil and Babylon, fearsome, fierce one,
I am Asalluḫi, dragon of the Anunnaki, lion of the Igigi,
I am Asalluḫi, foremost of … who splits the … mountain,
I am Asalluḫi, warrior of the gods, the director of Anduruna,
I am Asalluḫi, who is clothed with splendour, filled with terror,
I am Asalluḫi, wearing a tiara, whose radiance is adorned with awe,
I am Asalluḫi, who protects the needy, who saves the poor/weak,
I am Asalluḫi, who digs the canals, who sustains the life of the land.
I am Asalluḫi, seer who gives decisions, who assigns lots,
I am Asalluḫi, who reveals (the meaning) of cuneiform wedges, who destroys the evil and the wicked,
I am Asalluḫi, who daily picks on what the people say,
I am Asalluḫi, whose rays light up the lands,
I am Asalluḫi, whose brilliance destroys a stone wall.
I am Asalluḫi, wise, sagacious, superlative in intelligence,
I am Asalluḫi, whose weapon is a fierce flood,
I am Asalluḫi, who with his torch burns the enemy and the evil one,
I am Asalluḫi, Enlil of the gods, who looks after the world regions,
I am Asalluḫi, shepherd of all the peoples, protection of every population,
I am Asalluḫi, whose strength is not rivalled among the great gods,
I am Asalluḫi, who grasps the whole of heaven and earth, who holds the reins,
I am Asalluḫi, who administers the gods, assigns lots,
I am Asalluḫi, who forms regulations for the shrines, who grants the regular offerings,
I am Asalluḫi, at whose word the mountains subside and their peaks totter,
I am Asalluḫi, who, like the sun, looks over the lands.
I am Asalluḫi, who is responsible for spreading slander, but takes the hand of the fallen,
I am Asalluḫi, who purges the righteous and the wicked in the river.
I am Asalluḫi, savage, hero, lord of the land,
I am Asalluḫi, august, magnificent, ornament of lordship,
I am Asalluḫi, in fear of whom Every Evil returns to its lair,
I am Asalluḫi, who surveys the subterranean ocean, forms the (its) regulations,
I am Asalluḫi, who gives pasturage and watering, who sends abundant rain,
I am Asalluḫi, at whose utterance the grip of the Namtar-demon is undone,
I am Asalluḫi, whose godhead is great everywhere,
I am Asalluḫi, who nurtures his people like a father and mother,
I am Asalluḫi, the secret of whose heart his divine brothers do not know,
I am Asalluḫi, who uproots illness, who destroys the great devils.
I am Asalluḫi, the fierce storm, the persistent gorer who cannot be faced, am I,
I am Asalluḫi, who transposes evil destinies, who releases guilt,
I am Asalluḫi, the superb warrior, the expert on omens,
I am Asalluḫi, by whose spell the dead come to life, the sick man rises (from his bed),
I am Asalluḫi, who throws out the Namtar-demon and defeats disease, chill and headache,
I am Asalluḫi, the merciful god, who keeps at bay trespasses, sins and evil transgressions,
I am Asalluḫi, at whose mention the Anunnaki vanish,
I am Asalluḫi, the skilled one of the Igigi, who holds the reins of the Anunnaki,
I am Asalluḫi, who takes the hand of the weak and fettered, who releases guilt,
I am Asalluḫi, who dispels magic, sorcery and witchcraft, who drives away disease,
I am Asalluḫi, who cures grievous maladies, the physician of mankind,
I am Asalluḫi, without whom the life-giving incantation does not come near,
I am Asalluḫi, fierce yet relenting, next, father and mother,
I am Asalluḫi, who is merciful among mankind, Marduk,
I am Asalluḫi, unique one in heaven and earth, Marduk!
Asalluḫi, unique one in heaven and earth, Marduk, saw them.
To Nabû, his vizier he addressed a word,
Who is this who came here […]
To the fierce, great incantation of Ea […]
To the mighty booths of Ningišzida,
To the great regulations of Ea, lord of Eridu,
May burning Girra […] … like […].
May victorious Nusku […] gather them,
May Light […],
Should you be evil demons,
Scatter like [fog …]
[Should] you be evil angels,
… […]
Or … […]
Or the children … […] … […]
Or you who constantly clamber over mud walls …
Or you who are the owl(?), the watcher, [(…)] he who has evil at his disposal
Or you who are the epilepsy of the great gods,
Or you who are Bennu, the watcher of the night,
Or you who constantly scratch like a wolf,
Or you who constantly flash like lightening,
Or you who constantly flicker like a flame,
Or you who constantly … like fire,
Or you who constantly shine like daylight,
Or you who constantly shine like a star,
Or you who are constantly obscure like a black spot,
Or you who constantly overwhelm like a poultergeist,
Or you who constantly pick on (victims) like Lilû,
Or you who constantly enter houses,
Or you who constantly move over thresholds,
Or you who constantly clamber over rooves,
Or you who constantly walk around house foundations,
Or you who are constantly present in holes,
Or you who constantly seek the fine young man and fine woman on the street,
Or you who are the Watcher at noon,
Or you who are the Watcher of what people say,
Or you who constantly stand before an invalid,
Or you who constantly sit before an invalid,
Or you who constantly walk before an invalid,
Or you who eat with him when he eats,
Or you who drink with him when he drinks,
Or you who constantly frighten the invalid so-and-so,
Or you who constantly scare the invalid so-and-so,
Or you who constantly terrify the invalid so-and-so,
Or you who constantly obstruct before an invalid,
Or you who constantly wrinkle the nose before an invalid,
Or you who bare the teeth before an invalid,
Or you who constantly sit before an invalid,
Or you who grind your teeth before an invalid,
Or you who constantly put out your tongues before an invalid,
Or you who constantly open your mouths before an invalid,
Or you who constantly … before an invalid,
Or you who butt like an ox before an invalid,
Or you who display might like a wild ox before an invalid,
Or you who snort like a wild pig before an invalid,
Or you who … like a dog before an invalid,
Or you who constantly moan like a badger(?) before an invalid,
Or you who roar like a lion before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like a snake before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like a viper before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like an adder before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like a chameleon (?) before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like worms before an invalid,
Or you who constantly slither like a lizard before an invalid,
Or you who are always dark like pulled out hair before an invalid,
Or you who are always dark a billygoat before an invalid,
Or you who are always [dark] like a she-goat before an invalid,
Or you who always bleat like a kid before an invalid,
Or you who always dance like a lamb before an invalid,
Or you who always … like a fox before an invalid,
Or you who always fly like a wasp (?) before an invalid,
Or you who always climb over like a … before an invalid,
Or you who cover yourselves like a naked man before an invalid,
Or you who are ever black like bitumen before an invalid,
Or you who are white like gypsum before an invalid,
Or you who constantly walk in the streets,
Or you who constantly sit in the streets,
Or you who constantly recline in the squares,
Or you who constantly pick on the city in the evening,
Or you who constantly prowl in the city in the evening,
Or you who constantly seek out the city in the evening,
Or you who constantly clamber over (city) walls,
Or you who constantly accumulate in …,
Or you who constantly sit in (house) foundations,
Or you who constantly frequent ditches,
Or you who constantly leap over ditches,
Or you who constantly hid in crevices,
Or you who are shown to the river,
Or you who are slaughtered towards the river,
[Or you] who are dismembered towards the river,
Or you who constantly bathe in the river,
Or you who prowl in the river as if it were a flood,
Or you who prowl in the river,
Or you who constantly walk in forests,
Or you who constantly sneak in forests,
Or you who tread paths,
Or you who have no guardian on the steppe/in the Netherworld,
Or you who have been killed in battle,
Or you who have been struck down with a weapon,
Or you who have been struck down with a mighty weapon,
Or you who have been slaughtered with a dagger,
Or you who have been killed with a (large) mooring-pole,
Or you who have been threshed with spikes,
Or you who have been impaled on poles,
Or you who have been killed in destruction,
Or you who have no father and mother,
Or you who have no brother and sister,
Or you who have no family, kith and kin,
Or you who have no son and daughter,
Or you who have no heir to libate water,
Or you who sleep (in death) amid colleagues,
may Asalluḫi, prime son of Eridu, extirpate you,
may Asalluḫi, son of the great lord Ea, extirpate you,
may Asalluḫi, beloved son of Ea, extirpate you,
may Asalluḫi, sage of the great gods, extirpate you,
may Asalluḫi, sage of gods and men, extirpate you,
Asalluḫi, lord of heaven and earth, has exorcised you,
Asalluḫi has exorcised you by Ninurta, foremost son of Enlil,
Asalluḫi has exorcised you by Udbanu’illa, the great weapon of Ninurta,
Asalluḫi has exorcised you by Ḫendursagga, who roams about in the land (?),
Asalluḫi has exorcised you by Šar-ur and Šar-gaz, who fell enemies and evil ones.
May Meslamta’e’a hand you over to the gate of the Land of No Return,
May he commit you to the seven gatekeepers of Ereškigal,
May he hand you over to Namtar, vizier of the vast Netherworld, who holds the Gate of the Bound,
May he cause you to pass through the gate of the vast Netherworld,
May he deliver you to the great devils,
May Nedu, chief gate-keeper of the Netherworld, shut the gate on you,
May he hand you over to Ningišzida, chamberlain of the vast Netherworld,
May the Anunnaki, the great gods, bind you,
He has exorcised you by the great chamberlain of Allatu,
May the stream of the great Netherworld hold you back,
Do not come, do not ever seek, do not return <to> the body of so-and-so, son of so-and-so,
He has exorcised you by heaven and earth/Netherworld, by Anu, Antu; Enlil, Ninlil,
Dūri, Dāri; Laḫmu, Laḫamu; Engur, Ningarra; Alāla; Bēlili,
censer, incense, shadow, daylight, evening, night, walk, seat,
path, standing place, the regulation of Ea and Asalluḫi: you are exorcised,
uprooted, expelled, driven away, kept at a distance,
by heaven and earth/Netherworld, you are exorcised by the whip.
Be exorcised by heaven, be exorcised by earth/Netherworld. May the evil tongue stay away.
